[SE 0293 Revision 3] Extend Property Wrappers to Function and Closure Parameters (#1273)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/0293-extend-property-wrappers-to-function-and-closure-parameters.md

  - [Only allow implementation-detail property wrappers on function parameters](#only-allow-implementation-detail-property-wrappers-on-function-parameters)
  - [Passing a property-wrapper storage instance directly](#passing-a-property-wrapper-storage-instance-directly)
+ [Future directions](#future-directions)
  - [The impact of formalizing separate property wrapper models](#the-impact-of-formalizing-separate-property-wrapper-models)
  - [Explicit spelling for API-level property wrappers](#explicit-spelling-for-api-level-property-wrappers)
  - [Library-defined diagnostic notes for understanding API wrapper restrictions](#library-defined-diagnostic-notes-for-understanding-api-wrapper-restrictions)
  - [API Property wrappers in protocol requirements](#api-property-wrappers-in-protocol-requirements)
  - [Generalized property-wrapper initialization from a projection](#generalized-property-wrapper-initialization-from-a-projection)
  - [Extending property wrappers to patterns](#extending-property-wrappers-to-patterns)
  - [Property-wrapper parameters in memberwise initializers](#property-wrapper-parameters-in-memberwise-initializers)

>   - [Support `inout` in wrapped function parameters](#support-`inout`-in-wrapped-function-parameters)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Support `inout` in wrapped function parameters](#support-inout-in-wrapped-function-parameters)
```

2. The property wrapper accepts an `@autoclosure` to `init(wrappedValue:)`.

To ensure that the compiler always makes the same decision regardless of which module the property wrapper is used from, the compiler will only look in the defining module of the property wrapper for these initializers. To account for overloading and property wrapper composition, the compiler will infer the complete property wrapper [interface type](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/Lexicon.md#interface-type) before determining whether the property wrapper has an external effect.

### Implementation-detail property wrappers

By default, property wrappers are implementation detail. Attaching an implementation-detail property wrapper attribute to a parameter is sugar for declaring a local variable that's initialized via wrapped value using the parameter. Consider the following code, which attaches the `@Logged` property wrapper to a parameter.

```swift
func insert(@Logged text: String) { ... }
```

The above code is sugar for:

```swift
func insert(text: String) {

>   @Logged var text = text

Author: Perhaps we should avoid describing the transformation of implementation-detail wrappers as that of local property wrappers, due to their different setter semantics. Instead, we could refer to the transformation as local-wrapper-like (or something to that effect), if we don't remove such references entirely.

Reviewer 2: I totally removed the term "local property wrapper" and went straight to the full desugared code. Let me know what you think or if it needs more clarification

}
```

which the compiler further desugars to generate:

```swift
func insert(text: String) {
  var _text: Logged<String> = Logged(wrappedValue: text)

  var text: String { _text.wrappedValue }
}
```

Implementation-detail property wrappers on parameters must support initialization via wrapped value, and the parameter type must be equal to the wrapped value type of the wrapper.

The remainder of the Detailed design section describes the semantics of applying an API-level property wrapper to a parameter.

### API-level property wrappers

> Property wrapper that either accept an `@autoclosure` in their `init(wrappedValue:)` initializer or declare an `init(projectedValue:)` initializers will automatically become API-level wrappers. These wrappers become part of the function signature, and the property wrapper is initailized at the call-site of the function.

Reviewer: `initailized` → `initialized`

```suggestion
Property wrapper that either accept an `@autoclosure` in their `init(wrappedValue:)` initializer or declare an `init(projectedValue:)` initializers will automatically become API-level wrappers. These wrappers become part of the function signature, and the property wrapper is initialized at the call-site of the function.
```

Consider the following function which has a parameter with the `@Traceable` property wrapper attached:

```swift
func copy(@Traceable text: String) { ... }
```

The compiler will synthesize computed `text` and `$text` variables in the body of `copy(text:)`:

```swift
func copy(text _text: Traceable<String>) {
  var text: String {
    get { _text.wrappedValue }
  }

  var $text: History<String> {
    get { _text.projectedValue }
  }

  ...
}
```

#### Call-site semantics

When passing an argument to a parameter with an API-level property wrapper, the compiler will wrap the argument in a call to the appropriate initializer depending on the argument label. When using the original argument label (or no argument label), the compiler will wrap the argument in a call to `init(wrappedValue:)`. When using the argument label prefixed with `$` (or `$_` in the case of no argument label), the compiler will wrap the argument in a call to `init(projectedValue:)`.

Consider the `@Traceable` property wrapper that implements both `init(wrappedValue:)` and `init(projectedValue:)`:

```swift
struct History<Value> { ... }

> struct Traceable<Value> {

Author: ```suggestion
@propertyWrapper
struct Traceable<Value> {
```

It is important for a lot of interface code, whether that is between libraries or languages, to be able to easily pass around bridging types in a form resembling native language constructs. Property wrappers are very well suited for that, as they can simply wrap a reference or value of such a type, which users can, then, pass them around effortlessly and concisely. 

However, with the current limitation of property wrappers not being supported on function parameters, functions and closures can become heavily polluted with boilerplate code. Especially now, with more and more projects attempting to achieve interpolation with Swift, like [JavaScriptKit](https://github.com/swiftwasm/JavaScriptKit) and the [C++ bridging efforts](??), addressing this limitation is crucial.

For instance, @dabrahams demonstrated how `UnsafeReference` property wrappers could be used to pass around C++ references in Swift:

```swift 
@propertyWrapper
struct UnsafeReference<T> {
  public let address: UnsafePointer<T>
  
  init(_ address: UnsafePointer<T>) {
    self.address = address
  }
  
  var wrappedValue: T {
    address.pointee
  }
  var projectedValue: Self {
    self
  }
}
```

> On a more general note, property wrappers could also be used to bridge different concurrency domains for legacy codebases, which was discussed as a future direction of an [actor isolation pitch](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-2-protocol-based-actor-isolation/42123):

Reviewer 2: I think this section should be removed. The feature as proposed now does not provide a solution for this use case. I think the other two motivation sections already cover the exact use cases this proposal is built for.

Author: > The feature as proposed now does not provide a solution for this use case

It should have added an `init(projectedValue:)` there, besides that would be very useful functionality.

> I think the other two motivation sections already cover the exact use cases this proposal is built for.

I agree; the proposal is too long anyway.

```swift
func insert(text: String) {
  let _text: Logged<String> = Logged(wrappedValue: text)

  var text: String { _text.wrappedValue }
}
```

Note that the backing storage is a let-constant, and the local `text` property does not have a setter.

> > **Rationale**: It would be confusing if it appears that a user can mutate a parameter, because those changes will not be reflected in the caller once the function returns.

Author: Should we mention [SE-0003](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0003-remove-var-parameters.md)?

---
(I've actually made some more changes to match more closely SE-0003's motivation)

**Rationale**: The ability to mutate a wrapped parameter would likely confuse users into thinking that the mutations they make are observable by the caller; that's not the case. In fact, there was a similar feature in this language which was removed in [SE-0003](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0003-remove-var-parameters.md).

Implementation-detail property wrappers on parameters must support initialization from a wrapped value, and the parameter type must be equal to the wrapped value type of the wrapper.

##### Arguments in the property-wrapper attribute

> Property-wrapper attributes with arguments applied to parameters are always implementation-detail property wrappers, even if the property wrapper supports initialization from a projected value.

Author: > [...] implementation-detail property wrappers

Should we perhaps shift the focus from the wrapper to its initialization? The current semantics render API significance dependent on the property-wrapper initializer to be called. Thus, the above could be written as:

> Property-wrapper attributes with arguments applied to parameters always ~are~ **result in** implementation-detail ~property wrappers~ **initialization** , even if the property wrapper supports initialization from a projected value.

Reviewer 2: There is no difference between an "implementation-detail property wrapper" and "implementation-detail initialization". I don't think changing the wording here makes anything clearer

This method of initialization is not mandatory for functions using supported wrapper types, and it can be disabled by providing arguments in the wrapper attribute, including empty attribute arguments: `func log(@Traceable() _ value: Value) { ... }`.

##### Arguments in the property-wrapper attribute

Arguments in the property-wrapper attribute as well as other default arguments to `init(wrappedValue:)` and `init(projectedValue:)` have the same semantics as default arguments. These arguments are injected into the initializer call at the call-site, and therefore are evaluated by the caller. The same restrictions applied to default arguments are also applied to attribute arguments of API property wrappers attached to parameters.

##### Overload resolution of backing property-wrapper initializer

Though the property wrapper is initialized at the call-site, the argument type _cannot_ impact overload resolution of `init(wrappedValue:)` and `init(projectedValue:)`. For example, if a property wrapper defines overloads of `init(wrappedValue:)` with different generic constraints and that wrapper is used on a function parameter, e.g.:

```swift
struct LateInitialized<Value> {

>   init(wrappedValue: @escaping () -> Value) { ... }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  init(wrappedValue: @escaping @autoclosure () -> Value) { ... }
```

>   init(wrappedValue: @escaping () -> Value) where Value == Void { ... }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  init(wrappedValue: @escaping @autoclosure () -> Value) where Value == Void { ... }
```

Reviewer 2: I fixed the typo here, but I actually think this section should be lifted out from the API wrapper section because it applies to both kinds of property wrappers

  
}

func generic<Value>(@LateInitialized argument: Value) { ... }
```

Overload resolution will choose which `init(wrappedValue:)` to call based on the static type of the parameter at the declaration of the property wrapper attribute:

```swift

> // Both of the following calls use the unconstraint 'init(wrappedValue:)'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Both of the following calls use the unconstrained 'init(wrappedValue:)'
```

```swift
@propertyWrapper
struct Wrapper<Value> {
  init(
    wrappedValue: @autoclosure () -> Value
  ) { ... }
  
  init(
    wrappedValue: @autoclosure () -> Value

>   ) where Value : Collection { ... }

Reviewer 2: I really prefer the old formatting where the function signature is on one line. I was writing the code that way deliberately. For this example in particular, it's a lot easier to spot the difference between the two initializers with the old formatting.

Author: Oh, I see. I still think it's hard to parse this line on small screen. Do you think that the following may read better?

```swift
init(wrappedValue: @autoclosure () -> Value)

init(wrappedValue: @autoclosure () -> Value)
  where Value : Collection
```

Reviewer 2: I took `@autoclosure` out of this example so the line is much shorter now

Property-wrapper parameters cannot have an `@autoclosure` type.

> **Rationale**: A wrapped value cannot have an `@autoclosure` type. If `init(wrappedValue:)` needs to accept an `@autoclosure`, a warning will be emitted with a fix-it to use a regular `@autoclosure` parameter and a local property wrapper instead.

API property-wrapper parameters cannot also have an attached result builder attribute.

> **Rationale**: Result-builder attributes can be applied to the parameters in `init(wrappedValue:)` and `init(projectedValue:)`. If there is a result builder attached to a property-wrapper parameter that already has a result builder in `init(wrappedValue:)`, it's unclear which result builder should be applied.

Non-instance methods cannot use property wrappers that require the [enclosing `self` subscript](0258-property-wrappers.md#referencing-the-enclosing-self-in-a-wrapper-type).

> **Rationale**: Non-instance methods do _not_ have an enclosing `self` instance, which is required for the local computed property that represents `wrappedValue`.

> API property wrapper attributes can only be used on parameters in overridden functions or protocol witnesses if the original has the same property wrapper attributes.

Author: ```suggestion
API property wrapper attributes can only be applied to parameters of overridden functions or protocol witnesses if the original function or protocol requirement respectively have the same property wrapper attributes.
```

> **Rationale** Arguments in the wrapper attribute only apply to `init(wrappedValue:)`. To ensure that these arguments never change, the call-site must always use `init(wrappedValue:)` and pass the additional attribute arguments.

> Non-instance methods cannot use property wrappers that require the enclosing `self` subscript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-instance methods cannot use property wrappers that require the [enclosing `self` subscript](0258-property-wrappers.md#referencing-the-enclosing-self-in-a-wrapper-type).
```

## Effect on API resilience

> Implementation-detail property wrappers have no impact on API resilience. These property wrappers will not be preserved in the generated Swift interface for the module, so they are entirely implementaiton detail.

Reviewer: `implementaiton` → `implementation`

```suggestion
Implementation-detail property wrappers have no impact on API resilience. These property wrappers will not be preserved in the generated Swift interface for the module, so they are entirely implementation detail.
```

## Alternatives considered

### Preserving property wrapper parameter attributes in the type system

One approach to achieving the expected semantics for higher-order functions with property wrappers in the parameter list is to preserve property wrapper attributes in parameter types. While this is feasible for plain property wrapper attributes, it is not feasible in the case where the property wrapper attribute has attribute arguments, because type equality cannot be dependent on expression equivalence.

### Only allow implementation-detail property wrappers on function parameters

> Only allowing implementation-detail property wrappers on function parameters would eliminate the need for the API-level versus implementation-detail distinction for functions, because the property wrapper would never have an external effect on the argument. However, allowing property wrappers to have an external effect on the wrapped declaration is part of what makes the feature so powerful and applicable to a wide variety of use cases. One fairly common class of property wrappers are those provide an abstracted reference to a value, such as the [`Ref` / `Box` example](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0258-property-wrappers.md#ref--box) from the SE-0258 proposal, and [`Binding`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/binding) from SwiftUI. It's common to pass these property wrappers around, and there isn't currently a nice way to achieve the property wrapper sugar in a function body that uses such a property wrapper. The best way to achieve this currently is to use a local property wrapper and initialize the backing storage directly, e.g.

Reviewer: `those provide` → `those which provide`

```suggestion
Only allowing implementation-detail property wrappers on function parameters would eliminate the need for the API-level versus implementation-detail distinction for functions, because the property wrapper would never have an external effect on the argument. However, allowing property wrappers to have an external effect on the wrapped declaration is part of what makes the feature so powerful and applicable to a wide variety of use cases. One fairly common class of property wrappers are those which provide an abstracted reference to a value, such as the [`Ref` / `Box` example](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0258-property-wrappers.md#ref--box) from the SE-0258 proposal, and [`Binding`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/binding) from SwiftUI. It's common to pass these property wrappers around, and there isn't currently a nice way to achieve the property wrapper sugar in a function body that uses such a property wrapper. The best way to achieve this currently is to use a local property wrapper and initialize the backing storage directly, e.g.
```

## Effect on API resilience

> Implementation-detail property wrappers have no impact on API resilience. These property wrappers will not be preserved in the generated Swift interface for the module, so they are entirely implementation detail.

Author: ```suggestion
Implementation-detail property wrappers have no impact on API resilience. These property wrappers will not be preserved in the generated Swift interface for the module; they are implementation details.
```

> However, API-level property wrappers applied to function parameters are part of the API and ABI of that function. This is because a property wrapper applied to a function parameter changes the type of that parameter, which is reflected in the ABI; it also changes the way that function callers are compiled to pass an argument of that type. Thus, adding or removing a property wrapper on an ABI-public function parameter is not a resilient change. Furthermore, similar to the existing behavior of default arguments, arguments in wrapper attributes are emitted into clients and are therefore not a part of the ABI.

Author: ```suggestion
However, API-level property wrappers applied to function parameters _are_ part of the API and ABI of that function. This happens because a property wrapper applied to a function parameter changes the type of that parameter, which is reflected in the ABI; it also changes the way that function callers are compiled to pass an argument of that type. Thus, adding or removing a property wrapper on an ABI-public function parameter is not a resilient change. Furthermore, similar to the existing behavior of default arguments, arguments in wrapper attributes are emitted into clients and are therefore not a part of the ABI.
```

> Finally, property wrappers changing between implementation-detail and API-level is not a resilient change. For example, consider a property wrapper that is implementation-detail when applied to a parameter. Adding an `init(projectedValue:)` initializer to this property wrapper is a source-breaking change for clients that use this property wrapper in a function that is a protocol witness, and it is an ABI breaking change for any code that uses this property wrapper on a parameter. We expect this case to be very rare, and clients can work around the source and ABI break by either adding an argument to the wrapper attribute or using a local wrapped variable instead.

Author: ```suggestion
Finally, property wrappers changing between implementation-detail and API-level are not a resilient changes. For example, consider a property wrapper that is implementation-detail when applied to a parameter. Adding an `init(projectedValue:)` initializer to this property wrapper is a source-breaking change for clients that use this property wrapper in a function that is a protocol witness, and it is an ABI breaking change for any code that uses this property wrapper on a parameter. We expect this case to be very rare, and clients can work around the source and ABI break by either adding an argument to the wrapper attribute or using a local wrapped variable instead.
```

## Alternatives considered

> ### Preserving property wrapper parameter attributes in the type system

Author: ```suggestion
### Preserving property-wrapper parameter attributes in the type system
```

> One approach to achieving the expected semantics for higher-order functions with property wrappers in the parameter list is to preserve property wrapper attributes in parameter types. While this is feasible for plain property wrapper attributes, it is not feasible in the case where the property wrapper attribute has attribute arguments, because type equality cannot be dependent on expression equivalence.

Author: ```suggestion
One approach to achieving the expected semantics for higher-order functions with property wrappers in the parameter list is to preserve property wrapper attributes in parameter types. While this is feasible for plain property-wrapper attributes, it is not feasible in the case where the property wrapper attribute has attribute arguments, because type equality cannot be dependent on expression equivalence.
```

```swift
func useReference(reference: Ref<Int>) {
  @Ref var value: Int
  _value = reference
}
```

> Furthermore, property wrappers can already have an external effect on the wrapped declaration today. For example, the compiler may change the type of the accessors of the wrapped declaration based on the mutability of the property wrapper's `wrappedValue` accessors, and the synthesized member-wise initializer of a type containing wrapped properties can change based on which initializers the property wrapper provides. Formalizing the distinction can only help the compiler provide the programmer with more tools to understand code that uses such property wrappers.

Author: ```suggestion
Furthermore, property wrappers can already have an external effect on the wrapped declaration. For example, the compiler may change the type of the accessors of the wrapped declaration based on the mutability of the property wrapper's `wrappedValue` accessors, and the synthesized member-wise initializer of a type containing wrapped properties can change based on which initializers the property wrapper provides. Formalizing the distinction can only help the compiler provide the programmer with more tools to understand code that uses such property wrappers.
```
```suggestion
Furthermore, property wrappers today can have an external effect on the wrapped declaration. For example, the compiler may change the type of the accessors of the wrapped declaration based on the mutability of the property wrapper's `wrappedValue` accessors, and the synthesized member-wise initializer of a type containing wrapped properties can change based on which initializers the property wrapper provides. Formalizing the distinction can only help the compiler provide the programmer with more tools to understand code that uses such property wrappers.
```

## Effect on API resilience

Implementation-detail property wrappers have no impact on API resilience. These property wrappers will not be preserved in the generated Swift interface for the module, so they are entirely implementation detail.

> However, API-level property wrappers applied to function parameters are part of the API and ABI of that function. This is because a property wrapper applied to a function parameter changes the type of that parameter in the ABI; it also changes the way that function callers are compiled to pass an argument of that type. Thus, adding or removing a property wrapper on a public function parameter is not a resilient change. Furthermore, similar to the existing behavior of default arguments, arguments in wrapper attributes are emitted into clients and are therefore not a part of the ABI.

Author: ```suggestion
However, API-level property wrappers applied to function parameters are part of the API and ABI of that function. This is because a property wrapper applied to a function parameter changes the type of that parameter, which is reflected in the ABI. Thus, adding or removing a property wrapper on an ABI-public function parameter is not a resilient change. Furthermore, similar to the existing behavior of default arguments, arguments in wrapper attributes are emitted into clients and are therefore not a part of the ABI.
```

> Finally, property wrappers changing between implementation-detail and API-level is not a resilient change. For example, consider a property wrapper that is implementation-detail when applied to a parameter. If that property wrapper adds an `init(projectedValue:)` initializer, this is a source breaking change for clients that use this property wrapper in a function that is a protocol witness, and it is an ABI breaking change for any code that uses this property wrapper on a parameter. We expect this case to be very rare, and clients can work around the source and ABI break by either adding an argument to the wrapper attribute or using a local wrapped variable instead.

Author: ```suggestion
Finally, property wrappers changing between implementation-detail and API-level is not a resilient change. For example, consider a property wrapper that is implementation-detail when applied to a parameter. A property wrapper's adding an `init(projectedValue:)` initializer is a source-breaking change for clients that use this property wrapper in a function that is a protocol witness, and it is an ABI breaking change for any code that uses this property wrapper on a parameter. We expect this case to be very rare, and clients can work around the source and ABI breaks by either adding an argument to the wrapper attribute or using a local wrapped variable.
```

> **Rationale**: `@autoclosure` is unnecessary for the wrapped value, because the wrapped-value argument at the call-site will always be wrapped in a call to `init(wrappedValue:)` or `init(projectedValue:)`, which can _already_ support `@autoclosure` arguments.

> Function parameters cannot be wrapped without declaring a property wrapper.

Reviewer 2: What does this mean?

Author: I meant that there isn't a way for declaring "argument wrappers" without using the property-wrapper feature. That is, we support a special `init(argumentValue:)` initializer or an `@argumentWrapper` attribute for declaring property-wrapper-like syntax just for wrapping function parameters. In fact, it was [brought up](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-4-se-0293-extend-property-wrappers-to-function-and-closure-parameters/44858/14) in the pitch discussion by Frederick Kellison-Linn. I hope you understand what I'm referring to. 

I don't know how to describe that well, though; suggestions are welcome.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to include every suggestion brought up on the thread in the proposal (and when we do, it should go in Alternatives Considered instead of in the section about restrictions on the proposed feature). The proposal is already very bloated

Author: I thought it would make sense to explicitly mention that not differentiating function-parameter and property wrapping was not really a decision made by this proposal. However, now that you mention it, I think people (who have not really followed this proposal) will be able to figure it out.

* It prohibits the use of initializer arguments in the wrapper attribute. There's no point in declaring a wrapper as `@Asserted(.greaterOrEqual(1))` if any client can simply pass an `Asserted` instance with a completely different validation.
* It removes API control from both the property wrapper author and the author of the wrapped-argument function.

Keeping the property-wrapper storage type private is consistent with how property wrappers work today. Unless a property wrapper projects its storage type via `projectedValue`, the storage type itself is meant to be a private implementation detail inaccessible to API clients.

## Future directions

> ### The impact of formalizing separate property wrapper models

Author: I don't think this is really a future direction. In my opinion, it would fit in better with a "don't formalize the API-level vs implementation-detail distinction" alternatives-considered section (where the fact that it doesn't block future additions is explored). What do you think?

Reviewer 2: This section talks about the impact of this proposal on the future design space for property wrappers. People were really concerned about this on the Pitch 4 thread, so I wrote up a section about it. I agree that it's not talking about a specific feature that could be pursued in the future, but that's not the only purpose of the Future Directions section

The design of this property wrapper extension includes a formalized distinction between property wrappers that are implementation detail and property wrappers that are API. These two kinds of wrappers will need to be modeled differently in certain places in the language. This section explores the impact that introducing two separate models for property wrappers will have on the language and the future design space for property wrappers.

> The property wrapper model inside the declaration context of the wrapped property will remain the same between these two kinds of property wrappers. Whether the property wrapper is API or implementation detail, the auxiliary declaration model is fundamental to programmers' understanding of how property wrappers work and how to use them, and this model should not be changed in any future enhancement to the property wrapper feature. Property wrappers are and will always be syntactic sugar for code that the programmer can write manually using exactly the strategy that the compiler uses - auxiliary variables and custom accessors on the wrapped property. Any enhancements to property wrappers that add capabilities to the auxiliary declarations, such as access to the enclosing `self` instance or delegating to an existing stored property, will not be impacted by the API versus implementation detail distinction.

Author: ```suggestion
The property wrapper model inside the declaration context of the wrapped property will remain the same between these two kinds of property wrappers. Whether the property wrapper is API or implementation detail, the auxiliary declaration model is fundamental to programmers' understanding of how property wrappers work and how to use them, and this model should not be changed in any future enhancement to the property wrapper feature. Property wrappers are and will always be syntactic sugar for code that the programmer can write manually using exactly the strategy that the compiler uses — auxiliary variables and custom accessors on the wrapped property. Any enhancements to property wrappers that add capabilities to the auxiliary declarations, such as access to the enclosing `self` instance or delegating to an existing stored property, will not be impacted by the API versus implementation detail distinction.
```

### Explicit spelling for API-level property wrappers

The scope of what is considered an API-level property wrapper is very limited in this proposal, and the external effect of an API-level property wrapper may be useful for wrappers that don't fit the current definition. The `@propertyWrapper` attribute could have an explicit `apiLevel` option that allows library authors to define whether the property wrapper has an external effect on the wrapped declaration:

```swift
@propertyWrapper(apiLevel)
struct Asserted<Value> {
  init(
    wrappedValue: Value,
    _ assertion: (Value) -> Bool,
    file: StaticString = #file,
    line: UInt = #line
  ) { ... }
}
```

### Library-defined diagnostic notes for understanding API wrapper restrictions

> API property wrappers on parameters have more restrictions than implementation detail property wrappers, because they have an external effect to the function. One very nice thing about property wrappers as custom attributes is that the documentation for that attribute is defined by the library author. Extend this principle, we could allow library authors to also define custom diagnostic notes to help explain restrictions that exist due to the external effects the wrapper imposes on the function.

Author: ```suggestion
API property wrappers on parameters have more restrictions than implementation detail property wrappers, because they have an external effect to the function. One very nice thing about property wrappers as custom attributes is that the documentation for that attribute is defined by the library author. Extending this principle, we could allow library authors to also define custom diagnostic notes to help explain restrictions that exist due to the external effects the wrapper imposes on the function.
```

A custom diagnostic framework may also be useful for API-level property wrappers that are applied to properties, because such wrappers often change the semantics of the wrapped declaration in a way that fundamentally changes how the declaration can be used. For instance, a property wrapper may change the accessor mutability of the wrapped property, which may cause unexpected and unhelpful diagnostics when the programmer accesses the property incorrectly. The compiler cannot help explain _why_ there is a difference in mutability when the wrapper is attached, because the compiler does not understand how the property wrapper may change the behavior of the wrapped value.

### API property wrappers in protocol requirements

Protocol requirements that include property wrappers was [pitched](https://forums.swift.org/t/property-wrapper-requirements-in-protocols/33953) a while ago, but there was a lot of disagreement about whether property wrappers are implementation detail or API. With this distinction formalized, we could allow only API-level property wrappers in protocol requirements.

### Generalized property-wrapper initialization from a projection

> This proposal adds `init(projectedValue:)` as a new property-wrapper initialization mechanism from a projected value for function arguments. This mechanism could also be used to support definite initialization from a projected value for properties and local variables:

Author: ```suggestion
This proposal adds `init(projectedValue:)` as a new property-wrapper initialization mechanism, which accepts a projected value. It is currently confined to function arguments, but could be extended to support definite, projected-value initialization for properties and local variables:
```

```swift
func hasSideEffect() -> Int {
  struct S {
    static var state = 0
  }

  S.state += 1
  return S.state
}

@propertyWrapper
struct Wrapper {
  var wrappedValue: Int

  init(wrappedValue: Int) {
    self.wrappedValue = wrappedValue + hasSideEffect()
  }
}

func demonstrateEvaluationOrder(@Wrapper arg1: Int, arg2: Int) {
  print(arg1, arg2)
}

demonstrateEvaluationOrder(arg1: 1, arg2: hasSideEffect())
```

If the property wrapper initializer is evaluated in the caller, the output of this code is `2, 2`. If the property wrapper initializer is evaluated in the callee, the output of the code is `3, 1`.

> The proposal authors believe that these two kinds of property wrappers already exist today, and formalizing the distinction is a first step in enhancing programmers' understanding of such a complex feature. Property wrappers are very flexible to cover a wide variety of use cases. Formalizing the two broad categories of use cases opens up many interesting possiblities for the language and compiler to enhance library documentation when API wrappers are used, provide better guidance to programmers, and even allow library authors to augment the guidance given to programmers on invalid code.

Reviewer: `possiblities` → `possibilities`

```suggestion
The proposal authors believe that these two kinds of property wrappers already exist today, and formalizing the distinction is a first step in enhancing programmers' understanding of such a complex feature. Property wrappers are very flexible to cover a wide variety of use cases. Formalizing the two broad categories of use cases opens up many interesting possibilities for the language and compiler to enhance library documentation when API wrappers are used, provide better guidance to programmers, and even allow library authors to augment the guidance given to programmers on invalid code.
```

A custom diagnostic framework may also be useful for API-level property wrappers that are applied to properties, because such wrappers often change the semantics of the wrapped declaration in a way that fundamentally changes how the declaration can be used. For instance, a property wrapper may change the accessor mutability of the wrapped property, which may cause unexpected and unhelpful diagnostics when the programmer accesses the property incorrectly. The compiler cannot help explain _why_ there is a difference in mutability when the wrapper is attached, because the compiler does not understand how the property wrapper may change the behavior of the wrapped value.

### API property wrappers in protocol requirements

Protocol requirements that include property wrappers was [pitched](https://forums.swift.org/t/property-wrapper-requirements-in-protocols/33953) a while ago, but there was a lot of disagreement about whether property wrappers are implementation detail or API. With this distinction formalized, we could allow only API-level property wrappers in protocol requirements.

### Generalized property-wrapper initialization from a projection

> This proposal adds `init(projectedValue:)` as a new property-wrapper initialization mechanism from a projected value for function arguments. This mechanism could also be used to support definite initailization from a projected value for properties and local variables:

Reviewer: `initailization` → `initialization`

```suggestion
This proposal adds `init(projectedValue:)` as a new property-wrapper initialization mechanism from a projected value for function arguments. This mechanism could also be used to support definite initialization from a projected value for properties and local variables:
```

A custom diagnostic framework may also be useful for API-level property wrappers that are applied to properties, because such wrappers often change the semantics of the wrapped declaration in a way that fundamentally changes how the declaration can be used. For instance, a property wrapper may change the accessor mutability of the wrapped property, which may cause unexpected and unhelpful diagnostics when the programmer accesses the property incorrectly. The compiler cannot help explain _why_ there is a difference in mutability when the wrapper is attached, because the compiler does not understand how the property wrapper may change the behavior of the wrapped value.

### API property wrappers in protocol requirements

Protocol requirements that include property wrappers was [pitched](https://forums.swift.org/t/property-wrapper-requirements-in-protocols/33953) a while ago, but there was a lot of disagreement about whether property wrappers are implementation detail or API. With this distinction formalized, we could allow only API-level property wrappers in protocol requirements.

> ### Generalized property-wrapper initialization from a projection

Author: ```suggestion
### Generalized projection initialization 
```
```suggestion
### Generalized projected-value initialization 
```

I think removing "property-wrapper" improves readability. We've it made clear throughout the proposal that this feature is extending property wrappers, so I think we can remove this redundancy.

Reviewer 2: The phrase "property wrapper initialization from a projection" is deliberate because that's specifically referencing the syntactic sugar where you can assign to the `$` property and it will initialize the property wrapper. "projected-value initialization" sounds like regular initialization of projected value, which isn't the same thing.

switch Review(fromUser: "swiftUser5") {
case .revised(@Traceable let reviewText),
     .original(let reviewText):
  // do something with 'reviewText'
}
```

### Property-wrapper parameters in member-wise initializers

> Synthesized member-wise initializers could use property-wrapper parameters for stored properties with attached property wrappers:

Author: The comment from the code example should be changed to this to reflect the change from "memberwise" to "member-wise":
```swift
// Synthesized member-wise init
```

Reviewer 2: Heh, I made those changes because I did actually start using a spell checker. Of course, it doesn't spell check things in code blocks. Thanks!

## Revisions

### Changes from the second reviewed version

* The distinction between API wrappers and implementation-detail wrappers is formalized, and determined by the compiler based on whether the property wrapper type allows the call-site to pass a different type of argument.
* Implementation-detail property wrappers on parameters use callee-side application of the property wrapper, and have no external effect on the function.
* API property wrappers on parameters use caller-side application of the property wrapper, and are part of the function signature.

> * Overload resolution for property wrapper initializers will always be done at the property wrapper declaration.

Author: ```suggestion
* Overload resolution for property wrapper initializers will always be done at the property-wrapper declaration.
```

```swift
@propertyWrapper
struct Reference<Value> {
  var wrappedValue: Value {
    get { ... }
    nonmutating set { ... }
  }
  var projectedValue: Reference<Value> {
    self
  }
}

> func useReference(@Reference @Logged reference: String) {

Author: Before the code examples it says:

> **Example**: Consider the following `Reference` property wrapper, which is composed with `Asserted` and used on a function parameter:

When it should be:

> **Example**: Consider the following `Reference` property wrapper, which is composed with `Logged` and used on a function parameter:

In the conclusion it says:

> Since both the getter and setter of `Reference.wrappedValue` are `nonmutating`, a setter can be synthesized for `var reference`, even though `Asserted.wrappedValue` [...]

When it should be:

> Since both the getter and setter of `Reference.wrappedValue` are `nonmutating`, a setter can be synthesized for `var reference`, even though `Logged.wrappedValue` [...]

## Acknowledgements

> This proposal was greatly improved as a direct result of feedback from the community. [Doug Gregor](https://forums.swift.org/u/douglas_gregor) and [Dave Abrahams](https://forums.swift.org/u/dabrahams) surfaced more use cases for property-wrapper parameters. [Frederick Kellison-Linn](https://forums.swift.org/u/jumhyn) proposed the idea to change the behavior of unapplied function references based on argument labels, and provided [ample justification](#passing-a-property-wrapper-storage-instance-directly) for why the semantics in the first revision were unintuitive. [Lantua](https://forums.swift.org/u/lantua) pushed for the behavior of closures to be consistent with that of functions, and proposed the idea to use `$` on closure parameters in cases where the wrapper attribute is unnecessary. Finally, ideas from [Jens Jakob Jensen](https://forums.swift.org/u/jjj) and [John McCall](https://forums.swift.org/u/john_mccall) were combined to produce the 'inference of external property wrapper' design in its current form.

Author: I think we should add @benrimmington, as well. He has pointed out a lot of typos and helped refine the proposal even from the first revision (IIRC).

Reviewer: > I think we should add @benrimmington, as well. He has pointed out a lot of typos and helped refine the proposal even from the first revision (IIRC).

No thank you.
